Software should be for humans.

Software should be usable. Software should satisfy business needs. If software cannot do what you need – you don’t need such software. Ideally – if you have a set of features exactly you need for. No less, no more. Each additional feature is the possible location of a bug. Each feature which doesn’t exist is your unearned income.

Software should be robust. Each crash is time and nerves wasting. Even worth – you can lose important information. For example, you arrange of insurance policy. You have been requested a lot of information from your customer, and... Your accountant application is crashed. Maybe, your customer will not visit you anymore... But if you have a robust application, if you’re sure that you can serve each customer in no more than 10 minutes – you will always have a lot of customers. Good example is McDonalds – how often did you see a queue in front of order window, because “my terminal is hanging”? Personally me – never.

Software should be extensible. Especially it’s right for LOB applications. Business changes all the time. And you will always need new features in your software. New business rules, new screens, even new business entities. Please, don’t have illusion, that you will develop your LOB application and it will not change for some years. It happens in one case only – if your business is dying. But if your application changes every time when your business changes, and if these changes are implemented fast – you will be always two steps ahead. Of course, it’s very important not to have regressive bugs after changing your software...

Software should be friendly. It shouldn’t say: “Hey you, you have clicked on a wrong button! You can’t click here!” Application should just disable all "wrong" buttons. “I have an update. Do you want to install it? – Error occurred during installation of update. Or – Update is installed. Please, read readme.txt for more information” I like Chrome updates behavior – I never know when it updates. Never. I use it from 1st version. First 4 times I understood that it was updated only because some UI elements was changed. And from 5th or 6th version till current 17th I never know when it updates itself. Never. Or let’s look at Windows Media Player. Shortcut for “pause” is Ctrl+P. Are you kidding, man? I’m lying down on bed in dark room with a bottle of beer, I’m hugging my woman, and I want to pause film. Of course, I’m very happy that I should put somewhere my beer, that my woman hasn’t enough attention from now, just because I should look for Ctrl+P. Why not “spacebar”? Why? The same about volume control... This is why I never use Windows Media Player.

Software should be simple. Did you ever see those terrible “one screen” LOB applications? When one screen contains a hundred fields for data? It’s awful. Why don’t join information about customer (name, second name, surname, personal code birthdate, address etc.) in a single field? It’s too hard? C'mon, you’re just too lazy. It’s easier for you not to do anything, instead of to do things one time as it should be. And thousands of users will say you “thank you”. And they will use your application – instead of crying each time when they should fill this stupid form again.

Chrome, Skype, TeamViewer… These are almost ideal applications. They are usable – they do all they should. They are robust – they work always, even behind firewall, NAT, and all other scarried words. Okay, Skype is becoming not very robust in Microsoft’s hands, but it still works everywhere. They are friendly. They are simple – Chrome has only one field for both urls and search queries (why Firefox still has two?), Skype uses double click and “call” button, TeamViewer... They follow “principle of one button”. Download, Install (without options!), Start (without configuring!), Press “Do it!” button – and you have a result. One screen with one button – “Do it!” This is where we should go.

Software should be for humans.
